I'm Curt Parker telling the continuing
story of Penn State and the surrounding
community this is in motion now that
March is upon us
one question begs to be asked have you
made good on your resolution to get into
shape for many people who have made
packs to eat less and exercise more
their promises and determination have
fallen by the wayside many give up and
succumb to so-called quick fix remedies
such as pills restrictive diets or
gadgets supposedly designed to melt the
pounds away beyond all the fodder that
litters the landscape that is called the
diet industry is one tried-and-true
simple fact to lose weight your caloric
solution at the end of the day must be
in the negative
simply put burn more calories than you
take in while there are many different
eating plans on the market most depend
on eating only certain foods and
restricting the amount of calories taken
in in both cases satiety or the
sensation of fullness may not be reached
thus making it difficult to maintain any
diet Penn State researcher dr. Barbara
rolls has been studying satiety and the
types of foods that cause it well the
components of food that effects satiety
or that feeling of fullness that you get
at the end of a meal are the energy or
calorie density because you get good
satisfying portions of food and
surprisingly we found and others have
found that over a day or two people tend
to eat a pretty consistent weight or
volume of food
so if you lower the energy density you
can have a full plate of food without
very many calories and that appears to
be really important for weight
management the other components are the
protein content calorie for calorie we
think that lean protein is more
satisfying than carbohydrates or fat and
the other important component for
feeling full is the fiber content
high-fiber foods have been shown to help
with hunger control and to help with
weight management so basically this oils
down to eating more fruits and
vegetables according to her research dr.
rolls found out that lowering the energy
density or calories per gram and food
would allow enough food to be consumed
for satiety to be reached which means
fewer calories are consumed she
synthesized these findings into her new
book the volumetrics eating plan the new
book the volumetrics eating plan is
really a consumer-friendly practical
guide step by step here's how you manage
your weight and it's based on the
Dietary Guidelines Institute of Medicine
report so it's it's not a gimmick this
is me telling you in a readable form how
to do it the plan works like this by
simply taking everyday foods such as
pancakes for instance and extract on
some of the high energy dense
ingredients such as syrup and white
flour and replacing them with whole
wheat flour raspberry sauce and fruit a
higher volume of foods eaten while the
caloric intake is lowered her plan is
stocked with usable alternatives to the
common energy dense choices that many of
us make every day it's very easy to
overeat high energy density foods those
are the foods that pack a lot of
calories into a portion and typically
they're high fat foods fat has nine
calories per gram whereas carbohydrate
and protein have just four but the other
thing that really can affect the calorie
density in fact has the biggest impact
on
calorie density and on the portions of
food that we eat is the water content
water is the biggest component of food
and because it adds weight and volume
and no calories it lowers the calorie
density so if you bulk out foods with
high water content foods like fruits and
vegetables you get a much bigger portion
for the same number of calories doctor
rolls is one of many researchers around
the country that are fighting the
epidemic of obesity and epidemic that
now in dangers more than just adults we
are in the midst an epidemic of obesity
it's really quite frightening to those
of us who have worked in this field for
a number of years because the kids are
really becoming obese and an alarming
rate
starting at frightening ages age 8 we're
seeing obese kids by early teens we're
seeing kids with diabetes heart disease
so we need to be responsible as parents
we need to set an example to our kids
and need a good balance
well more information about the volume
metrics eating plan check out this
website and for more about the ongoing
story of Penn State be sure to tune your
web browser to live dot PSU edu I'm Curt
Parker and this has been